[SWOOSH]
[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Last year, I was lecturing
at an online conference full
of a room of women
similar to yourself.
And the speaker
immediately after me,
a well-known ob-gyn, whom
I loved, absolutely adored,
learned a ton from, she
said, of all the hormones
in the female body,
estrogen was her favorite.
Now, I was so excited.
I love estrogen. It's amazing.
It does such good
things in the body.
But the chat blew up full
of negative comments.
Oh, I have so many symptoms.
I know I have
estrogen dominance.
My PMS is the absolute worst.
Doesn't endometriosis-- isn't
that caused by estrogen?
And then there were symptoms
and comments like this.
My mom went into menopause.
She took estrogen.
She got breast cancer.
I will never take estrogen.
[SIGHS] Collective sigh.
I think it's pretty
safe to say estrogen
is the most
controversial hormone we
have in the female body.
But I'm here today to
help clear that up.
And I get it.
I'm a hormone doctor.
I know what they're saying.
I know what they meant.
Heck, I am pretty
sure many of you
have said the same thing at
certain points in your cycle
when you were frustrated with
all the hormonal things going
on.
Or maybe some of
you are menopausal
and contemplating
going on estrogen,
but you've heard
super scary things.
Estrogen is not the villain.
It's actually the
hero of our body.
Now, estrogen is
an umbrella term.
We have a lot of estrogens in
our body, believe it or not.
So when we think about
estrogens, like I said,
we have to think
of it as the hero.
And we have this really potent
estrogen known as estradiol,
or E2.
And estradiol is
important in our growth
and development, our
reproduction, our cycle,
our bone strength, growth, our
digestion, our immune system,
our skin, collagen formation,
our hair, our heart,
and even our brain.
A couple months
ago, I was walking
through the streets of
Barcelona with a notable doctor
friend of mine.
And she works with a leading
female neurologist, Dr. Kellyann
Niotis--
leading female neurologist.
Dr. Niotis told her, if
we are not on estrogen
within two years of
going into menopause,
the gray matter in
our brain shrinks.
I'm sorry, what?
Who designed that?
Who designed us?
I would like a word.
I have a few things I
would like to talk about.
You can imagine if your
gray matter has shrunk--
we don't generally like
shrinkage in the body.
But if it shrunk, you're more at
risk for mental health issues,
memory issues, brain fog issues.
You can't multitask
like you used to.
One of my friends called
it the CRS syndrome--
Can't Remember Shit.
And you're at risk for
things like dementia.
And that is actively
being studied
by other female brain
researchers, such as Dr. Lisa
Mosconi.
She wrote "The XX Brain."
And she's soon to write
"The Menopause Brain."
Now, I keep pointing
out female brain.
We've learned most
of that research
has gone to the male brain.
They get all the antiaging, all
the cardiology, all the brain.
But as the saying goes,
we are not small men.
Now, I'm tall as hell,
but I'm not a small man.
My brain and my hormones
are set up differently,
just like yours if
you're a female.
The good thing is, if you're on
estrogen within those two years,
the gray matter in your
brain doesn't seem to shrink.
But I get it.
You have PMS.
You have sore, tender breasts.
You have digestive
issues and immune issues
that go with your cycle.
You are moody.
You're depressed.
You're irritable.
You're crying.
And sometimes that's all
within the same 3 minutes.
Again, who designed us?
I don't know.
I'd like a word.
And we get brain issues.
So why would anyone love a
hormone known as estrogen?
Why would anyone
love this hormone?
Well, it turns out we used to
love estrogen. So let me give
you a little history lesson.
Back in 2002, this
stupid study was done
called the Women's
Health Initiative.
We shortened it to the WHI.
And in the Women's
Health Initiative,
they announced to the world, if
you are on a combination hormone
therapy, you had an increased
risk for breast cancer.
Perimenopausal and menopausal
women all over the world
stopped their
hormones and panicked.
Rightfully so.
This was horrible
news, except there
were a lot of problems
with that study
that we didn't
learn till later--
how it was run,
who they recruited,
the history of those women, and
how they reported the facts.
Since that time, a
lot of researchers
have gone back and
evaluated the study itself,
done additional research,
or evaluated women still
part of the study and found, ah,
what was announced to the world
was misleading or
downright false.
That's a huge revelation for us.
There was an estrogen-only arm.
There were two
parts to the study.
So there was the combination.
It was a synthetic progestin,
and ethanol estradiol.
That what was
announced to the world.
If you were in the estrogen-only
part, just this part,
you had less breast cancer.
That didn't make the news.
That was not on the
cover of "Time."
I didn't see it in
"People" magazine.
I didn't see it
anywhere in Yahoo.
Heck, I would have
accepted "Daily Mail."
I didn't see it anywhere
that the estrogen only
had less risk of breast cancer.
And to this day, researchers
are looking at that
and coming out with
the same conclusion.
In the estrogen-only arm, those
women have less breast cancer.
We have suffered badly for it.
Between all the symptoms
we get associated
with estrogen and the
news that hormones
cause breast cancer, what is the
message we get over and over?
Estrogen equals bad.
Now, I have a dog.
He is the light of my life.
When my dog digs in the
backyard, is he bad?
Of course not.
He is not stimulated.
And I need to take
him for a walk.
When my dog throws up
in the house, is he bad?
Of course not.
He just ate something
he shouldn't have.
And when my dog runs
through mud puddles
and then runs back through
the house, is he bad?
That one we fully
blame my husband
on because he forgets
to wipe his feet.
My point is,
hormones, like my dog,
react and interact with
everything in the whole world.
Your body.
We need things like
progesterone to go
with estrogen. Progesterone
is another hormone.
It's our calming, soothing,
relaxing, zen hormone.
And if your
progesterone is supposed
to be here but it's here
and estrogen is here,
you're out of balance.
But estrogen gets all the blame.
And estrogen goes through a
complex detoxification system.
It's two or three steps.
It starts in the liver,
usually, goes to the intestines
or the kidneys.
And if you have any issues
in any of those steps,
like a B vitamin deficiency
or constipation, guess what.
You can't get estrogen
out, just like
if you were taking trash to
the curb and somebody kept
bringing it back in.
Yuck.
You're going to get symptoms.
And then I'd be
remiss if I didn't
talk about estrogen chemicals,
like endocrine-disrupting
chemicals.
Estrogen and progesterone are
part of the endocrine system.
These are endocrine-disrupting
chemicals.
Stop disrupting the system.
The system acts estrogenic,
these chemicals do.
They bind to receptors
and turn them
on when you don't
want them turned on.
But unfortunately,
they're in everyday items.
They're in the plastic
lids on your coffee cups.
Sorry.
They're in your scented
fragrance and your detergent,
your perfume, your lotion.
They're in the forever
chemicals in the yoga pants
pressed tightly
against your body.
I'm not saying it's fair
or fun, but it's true.
And before you panic, it's
not all yoga pants, just
some of them.
But my point is, we
can't single-handedly
blame estrogen for everything.
A third to a half of our life is
going to be spent in menopause.
If you are cycling,
depending where
you are right now in your cycle,
if you've got a blood test,
you'd be like at a
level 100, 200, 300.
In menopause, you
drop down to below 20.
That's a big drop.
It interacts with all
systems, almost all cells.
So now you've got hot flashes,
night sweats, the brain issues,
heart issues, immune issues,
digestive issues, sleep issues.
You're depressed.
You're anxious.
You're not feeling as
connected as you used to.
You're gaining weight
right here out of nowhere.
So when it's your time
to consider hormones
as you're going
through menopause,
please don't be misled.
Don't fall into the fear.
Realize there's a lot of
misinformation out there.
And like my dog, who is
my favorite in my family,
we cannot single-handedly
blame estrogen for everything.
It's complicated.
The body is complex.
It's a system.
It works as a unit.
And we can't forget
progesterone.
When was the last time you
had your progesterone checked?
We can't forget estrogen detox.
When was the last time
you had that tested?
And we cannot forget
the chemicals.
So estrogen is not the villain.
It's actually the
hero in your body.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE, CHEERS]
[AUDIO LOGO]